Stanislav, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
It's great to have you here.
It's good to be here.
Yeah, it's good to have you here.
I wonder what version that we're going to end up shipping of this episode.
We're going to talk about API versions.
API versions.
It's good to have many of them, you know?
Yeah, it's one of those problems that, you know,
as soon as you create an API and people start to use it,
they don't want to keep rewriting their code.
So, but you need to evolve your API over time
as it gets new features,
as maybe more importantly, you realize like,
oh, that was a bad choice.
How do you fix this, right?
So that's kind of the theme of this episode.
We're going to talk about concrete tools
that you can use to add versioning to various API frameworks in Python and some of the ideas
behind it. So going to be a ton of fun. Let's start though with your story. Tell us a bit about
yourself. So previously I have been a backend engineer for six or even seven years now.
But recently I have shifted into infrastructure.
Right now I'm a platform engineering tech lead at Monite.
What I do is I make architectural decisions.
I mentor the teams.
I help the teams with Python specific questions.
But mostly I build Python specific infrastructure.
And my main job is making our business teams happy.
Excellent.
I try to do that.
Yeah.
I try to do that in my open source work as well.
I like to make my own open source projects.
I like to contribute to big projects, small projects.
It's all over the place.
And we're going to be mentioning one of them today.
Yeah, you built a really cool library
that we're going to talk about.
And that'll be a lot of fun.
It looks really useful.
And some other third-party ones as well.
So I wanted to ask you a little bit about
What is the difference between being a backend software developer, which I think a lot of people get the sense of, like building APIs, building the backend, at least, aspect of websites and so on, versus, say, building infrastructure in Python?
Like, what are these two worlds?
How are they the same?
How are they different?
So when you're building them, especially when you're building products, it's very similar.
However, in backend, there is already a lot of infrastructure around you.
There is already a lot of people who do portions of your job.
So like there are people who can sell your product.
There are people who are thinking about how to, you know, how to move it forward, how to evolve it.
There are people who are, you know, designing it, thinking about it.
But when you're a platform engineer, you got to do all of that yourself.
And also one big portion of any library framework or anything else, any developer tools development, is the fact that unlike an API, well, a web API, a REST API, which has a very strict sort of interface where the developer wouldn't be able to use it in a million ways.
a library, especially in a language as introspectable as Python,
the developers can do crazy things with your stuff.
So you've got to think forward for all of these use cases,
and you've got to be sure that you don't expose extra private interfaces
because once you do expose them, it won't be nice to break them in the future.
Yeah, absolutely.
I guess it's a little more restricted with APIs than it is with handing out packages, right?
Because people, they can just dive into the packages and do whatever you want.
And the API is more or less limited by what the website's willing to process, right?
Yep.
On the flip side, you have code on the internet.
And anytime you have code on the internet, that's always a little stressful, right?
Just like whatever is out there, it's incredible if you have a website, if you pull up the logs, how much abuse your website is taking constantly.
True.
But I mean, the great thing about building packages is that, you know, you're not worried about what happens with them after.
You know, you just skim them.
And then if it breaks, it's not you.
It's not on your servers, hopefully.
But also, as I mentioned, you got to both be its designer.
You've got to sell it.
You've got to talk people through that.
You've got to document it.
You've got to, as a platform engineer,
you do all of the parts that backend engineers are abstracted away from,
or at least in most bigger companies, abstracted away from.
Yeah.
Super interesting.
All right.
Let's talk about, I guess, one more thing for your introduction
before we move on.
You've worked on quite a few interesting projects here.
So maybe give us just a little bit of background on some of your open source work.
So I'll just talk about, I guess, the most popular ones.
The coolest one was PathWalk.
If you remember in Python, there is OSWalk, but then in Python 3.12, I added PathWalk.
I have also added the typeins for that into TypeShed, I think some other things.
And I am, I think, top 10 contributor of Tortoise ORM, the asynchronous ORM that claims to be
the fastest, or at least one of the fastest in Python.
And a few smaller projects, which I don't think there is anything particularly fun to
talk about there.
It's just mostly bug fixes and small features.
But then my other projects, the ones that I maintain, are way cooler.
For example, Pydantic Duality enables you to have multiple versions of your Pydantic models
for almost free in terms of performance and without any code generation.
And Cadwin, the project we're going to be discussing today, implements, I guess, the
fullest and most sophisticated API versioning paradigm there is at this point.
Excellent, yeah.
A lot of stuff.
- Duality looks, yeah, Pydantic duality looks really,
really cool.
So a lot of neat stuff here, a lot of different ways people
might know about you.
So yeah, Cadman's the one we're gonna be focusing on for here.
So let's start with talking about APIs.
You talked about API first companies, what's that?
- So API first company, just like any other term
in that gets popular is a buzzword, obviously.
But the truth behind it is
an API first company is any company
whose main product is an API
and the SDKs associated with it.
And as a result, API first company has to document
their API really thoroughly, think about their API,
both the internal one and the external one
and take great care of that
because it's their main product.
So we have a lot of API first companies right now,
but with every year, new industries are joining.
And if you ever heard of open banking, things like that,
banks are going to join us soon.
In some countries they already have.
And Monite is doing similar things
and tries to bring that innovation,
that open banking and that API first approach into banking.
- Yeah, so the company you work for Mo Knight,
they build, you all build APIs
to basically facilitate other people doing invoicing
and bill pay in their apps, is that correct?
- Yeah, you could call us a B2B2B company
'cause essentially many banks, many marketplaces
are very outdated in terms of how they handle
voicing and payments.
And we try to take all of that,
combine that and offer that
as a white label product to them.
So we do this for them.
They integrate with us once
and then they forget it was ever a problem.
They just give our product as theirs
straight to their clients.
Yeah, that's excellent.
So this seems like kind of in that category of API first.
Oh, yes.
Yeah. Okay.
Yeah, it's cool.
that you have concrete experience with it, right?
Of course.
So give us some of the laws.
We coordinated a little bit beforehand
and there's some interesting laws
for designing good APIs.
Like one of them is the reverse Conway maneuver,
which to me sounds like a jujitsu sort of move
that you might try to pull.
What is this?
Oh, yes.
So when you are designing any system, you got to think about the way it's going to end up and the laws that are going to govern them.
And Conway's law is one of the main laws that do that.
To explain that to people in simple terms, if you have four teams designing a compiler, you're going to have a four pass compiler.
And essentially, the way you set up communications within your company, the way you set up your teams, your structure is going to be reflected in your product and you can't do anything about it.
You can spend money, you can coordinate people, but at some point, Conway's Law is going to affect you and it's going to be harsh.
So one of the ways to, I guess, go around it is to first think of an interface that you want to provide.
And it applies to anything, not just APIs.
API is just a really good example of that.
And then design your company and the communications within your company, the teams within your company, to reflect the interfaces that you want to get in the end.
And that's reverse con with Mo.
Okay.
Because your code and your APIs and all those things are going to reflect your company structure.
and culture. So instead of having that being implicit, make it more explicit by saying,
well, this is the end point that we want, the end result that we want. How do we work that
backwards to end up structuring teams or whatever to get this, right? Precisely, yes. Yeah, it is a
little bit like Jiu-Jitsu. But there are more laws that do that. Of course, there is REST, which I
guess not really lost principles um which uh most people or at least most companies i saw
don't really like to follow it to the letter uh but if you do uh making you know
if you do follow rest if you try to make your api as available as as you can and as standardized as
you can then it's much easier for new people especially junior developers to learn and then
And that makes it much easier for your clients to integrate with you, which is great.
There are also a few, I guess, more advanced things.
For example, when you are designing an API, when you're doing microservices,
and when you have many services talking to each other,
which in the end provide your final product to your customers,
a good idea is to omit any internal APIs and make all of your APIs,
or at least the majority of your API is external.
That is also one of the things about API First.
Once all of your APIs are external,
it means that your clients will be able to build a product
that is of similar quality to yours.
We're using your APIs, using your data,
which provides them with infinite capabilities of using you,
which is great.
Yeah, that is great.
It's certainly frustrating when you see,
it's not on the API level,
but you see things in like the iOS platform or in Windows or wherever you're
like, why can't I do this?
Like these are,
these are private things that either Apple or Microsoft or whoever are keeping
to themselves and clearly are important for building apps,
but you can't use them.
Right.
So you're suggesting that by having basically whatever APIs you need,
I guess there's probably limits,
right?
Like you don't want to expose say you're like HR API if you're not an HR
company.
Right.
But in general, having your APIs just be all public, right?
It probably makes them better as well
because they just get so many more use cases.
They get treated with things like versioning
and stuff more seriously.
Yeah.
Excellent.
But it's a complex topic that could span.
You know, we could discuss it for hours.
You know, which parts of your API do you make public?
which parts of your API do you start versioning?
And if you're combining your APIs using a gateway or a federation,
you know, it's a long story.
But I guess with a federation, you wouldn't really make it public.
Sure.
Well, let's dive into that a little bit.
Let's talk about API versioning.
We know what versioning is in Python.
We have lock files.
We pin the version.
We might say we're using Pydantic 2.0.5 or whatever it is.
And that leaves the Pydantic team free to do whatever they want.
And we can trust that our code is going to stay the way it stayed.
I guess API versioning is that, but for web endpoints rather than software.
Yeah, and it's a little different, though, in some regards.
For example, when you're packaging your, I don't know, software and you just send it to clients, the thing is you need to have versions for every single thing.
For example, if we are doing a bug fix and we need to ship that to our clients, that is going to be a separate version.
But in web, when you're hosting it on a server and your clients just make requests to your servers, you don't need that.
You don't need to ship bug fixes as separate versions.
You can just ship them because they're not going to break anything for your clients and your clients will be able to automatically get them.
Same goes for minor versions.
Minor versions that just add features don't really need to be a version on APIs.
That leaves us with just major versions, which is why many companies like Stripe at Monite use dates for their versions because we don't really need all of the power of semantic versioning.
Yeah, sure. More calendar versioning because all you really need to say is,
this one is different than before.
It doesn't.
Stripe does a lot of interesting things.
We're going to talk a little bit about what they're up to.
But you're right.
When I think about APIs that I've created, sometimes I've had other versions.
One of the main areas is in the apps that we have.
over, is that URL work?
It does.
In the apps for consuming the courses, right?
We had two completely different versions of the app.
One got completely, completely rewrote it.
And many of the API endpoints were just fine.
We could just use them over,
didn't have to change anything,
but three or four were like,
you know, this really would be better if it was different.
And so added like a slash V2 or something in there, right?
but really, really limited.
So the thing that's interesting though
that you point out here is like,
until that happened,
I'd shipped many, many versions of that API.
And long as the schema didn't change,
I didn't bother even specifying that it had a version, right?
It was just like slash my courses or whatever it is, right?
Like just give those to me.
And long as it kept giving the courses back, it was good.
Exactly.
And that's the thing.
as long as you extend stuff, it's going to be fine.
But as you mentioned in the beginning,
you can't really do that forever.
At some point, you're going to make wrong design decisions.
At some point, even if you did everything perfectly,
you know, your product is just going to evolve.
It's just going to evolve.
And then you'll need to use old endpoints
that alter or, you know, get old data
and extend them in some breaking ways.
Of course, there are ways around it.
You can use API evolution.
You can just, you know, add fields constantly
and duplicate the old functionality.
But after a few such versions,
your API will look terrible,
which is why we use versioning.
And which is why when your company's main product
is an API, when you are an API first company,
you can't do anything without versioning.
You can live for a short period of time.
For example, a pre-series A company,
I don't think should deal with versioning.
But then after series A, after you gather, I don't know,
15, 20 clients, it will be really hard to survive
without versioning.
It's a really quick and easy way to make loyal customers angry
by making changes to your API that just start breaking code.
I remember...
Go ahead.
And even if, you know, if you make, you know, even if you wait for your clients, even if you, you know, warn them, it's still not nice when you're trying to use some API.
And then every three months or every month, it breaks everything.
Yeah, exactly.
Even with you put in all the work to do the integration.
You got it working.
You tested it.
Your job is your product is not the integration.
The integration facilitates what you're trying to build.
And every time you got to go back and rewrite that stuff, it's not great.
I was working.
I have MailChimp for our newsletter marketing side of stuff, the courses, and use them for
a long time.
And I got a message like, hey, we're retiring this API you're using.
And their API is dreadful.
Their Python library API is dreadful.
It's like star args, star star kwo args.
You better pass the right things.
there's no enforcement or instruction about what goes in there. Right. And so some random dictionary
that was going in, there was no longer right and had to be like recreated. So they just decided,
you know, we're going to just take different stuff and we're just going to shut down that
endpoint. And when they did all of the aspects of my website just started breaking. Like it wasn't
crashing, but just anything around, Hey, put me on your newsletter. Like, Nope, you couldn't be on
the newsletter. Cause it, you know, people started sending me a message, Michael, I'm trying to sign
up to be on the newsletter but uh it it just keeps saying that something went wrong with our site
we're sorry i'm like oh boy uh go look and they just turned off that endpoint and it was just like
nope not doing that anymore it was super frustrating it took me eight hours to rewrite it because like
i said there was no real guidance on like oh you just passed the dictionary like well what goes in
the dictionary you know it was like some word of one of the keys change i was so it just took forever
it was frustrating so what we're going to talk about here is a lot about how how does that how
do you not do how do you not pull a mailchimp how do you set it up so that your code keeps running
and you know the reason why they did that is they're like well we feel like we wrote it wrong
before we want to fix those for to make it better but we don't want to maintain two versions right
that's probably the heart of it you know it is until you have half a million users of the old
api and how many of those like so for me yeah i was frustrated yeah i'm like all right well i had
plans today for constructive work but i'm gonna go rewrite what i did four years ago and then i'll do
something again tomorrow but okay that's like a pretty good outcome a more common outcome is
probably I hired a consultant to build me an app and integrate MailChimp and
they're gone.
And now my thing that I,
I built a year ago doesn't even work and I don't have the skills.
I got to go hire somebody again to dig back in there and fix it.
Right?
Like that would be really frustrating.
Yeah,
that's crazy.
And,
uh,
it could be devastating to some clients,
especially if the changes are huge,
especially if it's not just a single end point or if there is only one end
point.
and it does a lot of things, then, oh my God, it's scary.
It is, it is.
Before we move on to maybe some of the approaches,
Alex, Alexi out in the audience says,
one more law, Hiram's law is also great.
With sufficient number of users of an API,
it does not matter what you promise in the contract.
All observable behaviors of your system
will be depended on by somebody.
It is one of my favorite laws about any system.
That is very true.
And it's a scary law, you know, because at some point you'll have to version everything,
which is why it's a good idea to make things, you know, I guess to describe all the behaviors
and to try to handle all of the possible behaviors early so that you know what is going to become
a part of it because at some point you'll just not be able to stop it and then you break something
that uh was not was never intended to work and then a hundred of your users are like oh we were
using that we were it wasn't a bug it was a feature for us yeah we needed that we found that's the
only way we could use it yeah for sure all right let's talk about some of the techniques you put
together a nice thing here like how to maintain hundreds of api versions and survive like so what
What are some of the ways in which people version APIs?
So first of all, it's really hard to really figure out how people do this and how to do
it.
Because 90% of the time when you're going to be researching API versioning, what you're
going to see is people having tough decisions between putting it into a header or putting
it into a path.
then when you ask, well, how do you version? Nobody really has an answer. Well, there are a few ways.
First of all, you can go from the lowest level and version everything, including your database.
You know, you just make a separate copy of your app. You can host it on a separate server, even
a separate Kubernetes namespace and forget about it. And, you know, you have two completely separate
apps and now you have the you know you need to have double the people for the maintenance or
at least a smaller separate team to maintain the second product um this approach is really nice if
you have a product that cannot break like there is there needs to be zero possibility of that
breaking you know if uh you are i don't know on a nuclear power plant you'll probably do that you
You know, you can't have the old one broken
and, you know, the new one working.
But it's the most expensive approach, obviously.
You can, however, limit that.
You can start versioning just the application,
but not the database.
Okay, now we have the same thing, you know,
a separate branch in our code,
a separate, not in our code, in our repository,
a separate Kubernetes namespace, whatever.
But now it's still expensive.
It's still a whole separate copy of everything you have built.
And now you have to make sure that the new one or the old one doesn't break the database
because the database might have changed.
But one of the versions of code might not know about that.
And then you realize it.
Yeah, the database aspect of it sounds especially tricky.
Especially a relational database with super strong schemas.
Like, you know what?
that used to be a VAR char and now it's an int.
And so, nope, it's not, like,
it's just not gonna work, right?
There's really little flexibility.
So even if you run the two things in parallel,
then you almost have to have two databases
and then like Emil points out
and then you have to sync the databases
and like, it's not trivial.
- Oh yes.
And then you start realizing, okay,
why do I need a separate branch and a separate namespace?
let's just keep them within the same app.
Because as long as, you know,
you have separate paths for this,
even you can build separate swaggers from them,
you can have them within the same branch,
within the same repository,
just in different directories.
And you can just copy all of your code.
And now I call that versioning by suffering.
Because you think,
oh, I'm going to version less this time, you know?
Now I'm not versioning the database.
Now it's not a separate branch.
it's going to be much easier to, I don't know,
make fixes in both places.
But now you have to support both of the code bases.
And once you update anything,
any of the related resources,
for example, the database models,
you have to update them twice.
If you update any of the dependencies,
And that can get painful.
And after a while,
if you have more than two of these versions,
you're going to be asking yourself,
okay, what is the difference between these versions?
And if you weren't careful with documentation and code review,
oh, you're in for a treat.
Yeah.
But that's just the beginning.
You can version much less.
Now, instead of the whole directories,
you can version just separate endpoints.
And I think that's the way that I recommend for everyone.
Everyone who is doing API versioning,
who wants to be with the cool kids,
I recommend this approach.
As long as you are a small company or an individual and you want something really simple, that's a good way.
You just copy a single endpoint that you have changed, create another schema for that, and then create another branch in your business logic.
Or maybe even no branch.
That's even better, you know, using the same business logic.
But then at some point, once you want to support many versions or your versions become too different, that's where you get a problem.
Because now all of a sudden you have all of these,
oh, I have this endpoint in this version,
that endpoint in that version.
Oh, it's going to be bad.
Yeah.
Really bad.
Yeah, yeah.
We've been talking like there's the old version
and the new version.
But in practice, somebody starts to depend on the new version
and then you evolve the new version
and it just, it combinatorially explodes
and it's out of control.
Yeah.
Precisely.
So it's going to be really bad for your developers.
Your clients are going to be fine with it.
your developers are going to hate you.
Although not as bad as with the previous approach.
Now, the next one you get to is you start thinking,
okay, what if instead of duplicating all of that stuff,
I am just going to change the schemas?
So, okay, if I do need to rename my endpoint,
I am going to duplicate it.
But most of the time, you're not.
Most of the time, you're just changing some field
in some schema.
You're renaming it, you're extending it,
changing its type, you know, stuff like that.
That's like 90% of your use cases.
Okay, what if we just change the schemas
and then have some serializers?
For example, Django DRF loves that.
They love the serializers and re-serializers.
And you can just have each,
we have five versions and version one serializes
into version five, version two serializes
into version five, yada, yada, yada.
And so our client sends us a request.
We re-serialize it into the correct version.
Then we return a response.
We use the same business logic.
And then we serialize it back into each version.
Great.
Now, we have solved all the problems of the previous approaches.
Now, you need to realize that when you're doing something like this,
you are in a little bit of danger of creating bugs in the new versions
and these bugs cascading to the old versions,
which hopefully you have tests to handle that.
But at least your clients are happy
because you can support versions for a long time
and your developers are happy
because the burden of support is now on the serializers.
But you still have to support these serializers.
It's still a lot of stuff.
You still have to put every field in there
and take care of any problems that happen.
And each new version will change
basically all of your serializers.
a little bit yes but you won't be able to support 20 versions like that it's going to be crazy
and now that's where we get to uh the final approaches the approaches that i guess uh
the most sophisticated in the industry if you are making a back end for front end uh for your own
front end then you can just use graphql graphql basically requires no versioning and that's one of
the benefits of it.
I would recommend that if you have developers
that are good with GraphQL, that's great.
You can omit versioning altogether.
But if you're not, if it's a public API,
then that's where Stripe's approach comes.
I think they were the first ones
to publish an article about that.
It was Brander Leach, the author of this article.
He has supported API versioning at Stripe for a while
and he has helped us with building our API versioning approach.
Essentially, what Stripe did is said,
okay, let's imagine that our developers are only supporting one version,
the latest one, just like with serializers.
But instead of serializing every version to the latest one,
let's say that each version knows how to serialize into the next version.
So let's say that...
Kind of like database migrations.
Exactly.
So let's say that I return response from the latest version.
This response, or at least they call them, I think, version gates.
These version gates, the version gate for fifth version,
knows how to convert back my response back into the fourth version.
The version gate for the fourth version knows how to convert it back into the third version.
And all of a sudden, you get simple version gates.
because if it's just field renaming in a single version,
then it's just a single line.
They're really simple.
But at the same time, they're immutable
because these version gates,
they're not describing the whole schema.
They're describing the difference between two versions.
And because we know that we don't want to change the old version,
we want the old version to work,
which is why the difference between version 2 and version 3
is going to stay.
It's not going to change,
which is why these converters are also immutable,
which means that you don't need
to spend much time supporting them.
Right, once you get, if you're on version three
and you get the transition from one to two set,
like that's not gonna change ever, right?
Exactly, precisely.
Well, at some point you need it for optimizations
or for returning extra data,
but it's such a rare use case that I haven't seen it so far
and I hope that I won't.
But yeah.
Yeah.
So this is Stripe's approach.
And one of the things that's really interesting that Stripe does and is laid out in this article that you're bringing to the table here is they also implicitly assign you a version when you first make a call, which was really interesting.
And I use Stripe, and I didn't realize that when I've made calls into Stripe that the first time you make a call, it pins you somewhere like on your user account on their side, pins you to that version of the API, and you never know you're on a different, you're on a particular version, but they keep you on that version.
That's wild.
That's great. Imagine you log in into Stripe, you make a call, and then every time you open a documentation in your account, you're going to see your version. Every time you make a call, you're going to get response from your version. And then because they keep versions for years, for example, we are using, I think, a three or four year old version of Stripe's API, and they still keep it.
According to this article, they keep all of their versions, all since the company's beginning.
I'm not sure how cool that is.
Yeah.
But still, they keep years worth of versions.
That is very true.
Now, you might see that as a negative.
Like, you might think, well, I'm pinned to this version.
Like, how do I escape the old version if I want the new version?
But you can pass it in a header.
Or there's other ways to say, I explicitly choose something else.
But by default, you're just living in the past.
Yeah.
And that's really cool.
You integrate, and then you live in the past for as long as you want.
The thing is, yes, you can change it using a header.
Monite has a similar structure.
You can also change it in your partner's portal.
And you can also, or I guess developer's portal.
And you can also specify, for example, if you receive webhooks from Stripe,
You can specify, okay, I want this webhook of this version and that webhook of that version.
You know?
That's cool.
And it's a really neat interface that if you don't want to think about versioning, you don't.
You forget about it.
But the second you want to, the second you want to have the latest API, they give you all the tools to work with it nicely.
And that's the thing.
this approach allows you to keep years worth of versions or maybe even decades worth of versions
actually without your developers getting overburdened because there is still a single
version of the business logic they work on a single version of schemas and they just need to
make sure that when they release a new version they write a converter for it and your clients
are also happy because they never need to switch yeah it sounds really nice i suspect there's not
a complete ability to just ignore the old versions
because maybe in your new version,
you're going to imagine this piece of data doesn't even exist
and we're going to remove it from the database.
But if it needs to be there for the old ones,
there's probably some level of your constraint a little bit,
but it sounds a lot better still.
Yeah, you're still constrained,
But remember, API versioning, if we translate it, you know, application programming interface
versioning.
We're not versioning the app.
We're versioning the interface to the app.
So a lot of times it's like, what fields are we passing or something, right?
Yeah.
So if you are trying to change the data between versions, if the data is different, entirely
different, I mean, then you're probably not doing API versioning.
then you probably should be calling it application versioning.
And actually, Stripe has, I guess, a hack for that too.
If you take a look at their API, they still have a V1.
But that's the thing.
They don't use this V1.
They use date-based versioning that is in the headers and their settings.
But V1 is precisely for this situation.
If someday they will need to have something else, if someday they will need to break everything and change the data required or any other crazy changes, they will be able to do it using that V1.
Yeah.
It's just there in case.
Exactly.
Yep.
Cool.
All right.
Well, let's talk about your project.
Let's talk about your project that makes this possible in Python.
Because the Stripe examples, I believe this is Ruby that they all have here, right?
which is really nice to read until you try to understand it,
until you try to understand what it actually does.
And it's great.
I know.
When I was reading this today, I was like, you know,
I'm pretty glad that I'm not writing Ruby right now.
Okay.
All right.
Let's talk about Python though.
You've got a project called Cadwin that takes the Stripe philosophy
and applies it to versioning
for the most popular API framework for Python,
FastAPI.
Tell us about it.
Yeah.
So here's the thing.
When I started developing it,
we were using versioning by suffering.
So we were using directory copies.
And none of us really enjoyed it.
So there needed to be a solution.
And I went to Stripe, I went to other companies,
I spoke with them, I tried to understand
the nitty-gritty details.
As I mentioned, Brander Leach extended us huge help
when he, I guess, described how he thinks
about API versioning right now.
And I built it.
The first version was just like Stripe.
It was exactly what Stripe did, you know, to the letter.
But then at some point, we started applying it
and I realized, wow, Stripe had a lot of legacy.
So they didn't implement some things.
For example, in Stripe's article,
you can see that they're not using any schema validation
or at least, how do I describe it?
Their business logic just receives a hash map, a dictionary.
It's not statically typed.
But Fest API uses Pydantic,
so it's a bit more complex than that.
okay, we added support for that.
It's a bit more complex.
It's a bit more, I guess, sophisticated now.
But then I also realized that Stripe,
they don't migrate requests.
They only migrate responses
because a migration of a request
is usually not just a breaking change.
It's a change in a business logic
because when you return a response,
you can just return the whole thing
and then just play around with it.
But when you are changing the request,
your business logic also needs to change.
and that's what they did you know they have extra ifs and extra you know levels of business
logic to handle that well apparently it's not necessary apparently requests are also migratable
uh and that's the second uh feature that greatly distinguishes us from uh stripe this thing
can statically well by statically i mean uh it code generates your schema so that you can see
everything before you run your app.
This thing can migrate both requests and responses,
and it supports everything that Stripe does.
And we have pretty big plans for extending it.
And as an added bonus, we also have pretty big documentation.
Well, not compared to Django or FastAPI.
Django is older than me and FastAPI is pretty amazing for, how do I describe it?
It's pretty amazing in terms of its documentation.
Sebastian Ramirez is an expert at making tutorials.
And if you take a look at our reference documentation to the left and our, how do I describe it?
recipes documentation, they basically describe to you every single use case that you could have
with API versioning. Every single, you know, every single problem that you could solve with it.
And then we try to apply our approach to it. So it's not just the framework. It's all the ways
you could use the framework. Someday, hopefully, we will also extend it beyond FastAPI and Pydantic.
and we also have sections for theory
for people who are not Pythonistas
who just want to learn how to do API versioning
but fail to find any resources.
So Cadwyn also becomes this, I guess,
hub for API versioning resources
and anything related to them.
Sure.
It seems like it would probably be pretty easy
to adapt to anything that uses Pydantic
for its data exchange.
Oh, yes.
Yeah.
So like, for example, in Flask,
Flask doesn't do the model binding type stuff
on the endpoint, but you can just take the input data
and just star start into a Pydantic model.
And then, you know, now you're in Pydantic world, right?
So it sounds like maybe something along those lines
might be a good bridge.
- Oh yes, it can be.
So there's a lot of magic involved in trying to interface
with FastAPI simply due to its internal complexity.
- Sure.
- But yeah.
- All right, so some good questions,
but I think they'll be somewhat answered.
If we just maybe talk us through your tutorial here,
like what is it, how do we use Cadwyn
and how does it manifest?
How does it work at runtime, stuff like that?
- So first before using Cadwyn, you know,
you write your regular app,
but then you just structure it a little bit differently.
When you are versioning,
you need a directory that you will consider versioned.
And this directory will be duplicated for every version.
No worries, you're not going to support the version code.
It's going to be code generation all the way through.
And you can use it to generate connectors
for your application,
or you could use it to generate schemas or enums,
you know, the different version of them.
and anything else related to them.
So you pick such a directory,
you call it latest as for your latest version.
Then you define a single version bundle.
If you go a little bit down,
you will see somewhere in here after defining versions.
Yes, we define our version bundle with a single version,
whichever version it is for you,
whichever date it is for you.
And then you run code generation.
It generates basically empty, how do I describe it?
It generates a directory that simply imports from your latest.
And that's where you can start doing the magic.
Now you just use our versioned app.
If you take a look, we have a versioned API router.
Then you use the CatVan version app.
you generate versioned routers,
and then it's going to generate
a really nice Swagger for them.
If you open it somewhere, I think, yep, this one.
So now your dashboard, the one on docs,
is not the Swagger page,
but the dashboard of all your versions.
And that's it.
After that, you can simply repeat the steps above.
So you write a migration, write that converter that describes the difference between the versions.
We have it somewhere there.
Let's see.
Yep.
For example, if we had an address as a string and we want to change it to a list, we say, okay, schema, base user.
So for people listening, you have a user object, which is a Pydantic model.
The user object in version, the initial version, just had a field called address, which was a string.
But you said, you know what?
People might have multiple addresses that they live at.
So let's make it a list of strings and make it addresses, right?
Which seems like a minor change.
But clearly, that's going to be a major problem for the things that assume there's an address and it's no longer there.
Right, so you create this version change derived class that has a upgrade downgrade basically feature, right?
Yep.
And so you just describe, you simply describe how to migrate your, how do I, you simply describe how do you migrate your schemas?
How do you change your schema classes, your Pydantic models?
and then you describe how you convert your request
and response.
And that's it.
This class is the only thing you write for the new versions.
Then you run code generation, run your app.
That's it.
Everything works.
Yeah, that's super cool.
So a couple of questions or comments
that are interesting here is Emil asks,
is it like database migrations?
And it's really similar to like Alembic, right?
You say, generate me the changes.
Alembic is a little different in that it looks at the two different database schemas and tries
to actually write the migration code to do the DDL changes.
But in principle, it's like every time there's a version change, there's some bit of code
that is generated that will run.
And then the other one is about, you know, how does this affect performance?
And I guess the only real performance change
is like there'll be a couple of steps to the serialization,
but they're often small.
Like in this case, the new version takes the old data
and says, well, we're just gonna have a list
with one address.
So we're gonna stick the one address
into the list of addresses and vice versa.
You just set the address field
to be the first thing in the address list.
And like, that's a really low amount of code overhead
to go back.
Hopefully people are moving towards the new versions eventually, you know, that kind of thing, right?
But if they don't, then this code just runs to transform the dictionaries that goes back to it, right?
Yeah, but the thing is, imagine you have, like Stripe, I don't know, 13 years worth of versions.
Now, if you are a successful company, and if you are alive, you are probably a successful company after 13 years, you know.
if you are a successful company,
that most of your clients will probably be newer ones.
You know, the longer you exist,
the more clients you have,
and the more clients you have,
the more, you know, newer clients you have,
the newer API versions they will use.
And this means that most of your clients...
Even if they're old clients, they might decide to...
They might rewrite their own app and get a new version, right?
Like, they could upgrade their code,
because their code's going to be 13 years old
or 12 years old at this point.
They're like, they need to change too.
And so at some point, yes, your old client might, you know,
from the very first version might request something
and then will go through all converters.
Well, not all, all converters that are related
to the specific request and response.
And that is probably going to be in the tens,
not even in the hundreds, even after 13 years.
But your clients from the latest versions
or even from the middle versions will not suffer that.
So the majority of your clients
will actually see almost no performance difference.
And even your old clients,
even your clients for 13 years old will probably,
even if they do see a performance difference,
it's not going to be multiple orders.
It's not going to be 2X, 3X.
It's probably going to be maybe 20%,
maybe even 10%, depending on how slow your app is.
And that's considering how many years have passed is crazy fast.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
That's very cool.
So what about the URL?
What about the endpoint?
How much do consumers of your API have to actually think about, I'm using this version or that version?
Is the version passed as a header?
Is it a query string?
part of the URL?
The version is passed as a header
and
Catwin by default
requires it to be.
But if you have some developer
portal, if you want to store your
version in some database,
then even though it's a little
more advanced,
you can write yourself your own middleware
that will check if the client
already has a version and then pick that
version and put it
into the context var
And it's possible.
So by default, you're going to have,
no, no, no, middlewares are
the more advanced sections, not in the tutorial.
This one has an,
this other one we're going to talk about in section
has just an example of all,
you basically just in FastAPI,
when you create the app,
you know, like app equals FastAPI,
you just say middleware equals a list of classes
that implement these behaviors.
So what you're suggesting is,
Like you just create a class and you pass it in at FastAPI startup and it just goes, is there a version being passed to me?
If not, let's see who the user is based on their API key.
Pull that from a database and maybe just set that header right there before the request and then let it fly.
Right. Something like that.
Yep. And then your API will essentially be Stripe like where your client won't need to think about versioning at all.
But by default, of course, the clients need to always pass it with a header, which might
sound like something really, you know, unnecessary and hard for the clients.
But if you imagine that you're writing code, it's exceptionally easy to just put it into
your, I don't know, requests or HTTPX client and forget about it, you know?
Yeah, it is pretty easy.
Even if you're consuming APIs in the fashion that we're talking about, you're probably
already put in an API key or some kind of thing into the header as well, right?
Like, so you're already messing with the header anyway.
Just put another value in there.
Yep.
Precisely.
Yeah.
Very cool.
All right.
So right now this is a FastAPI thing, but you're considering opening up to other areas,
other platforms, other frameworks?
Oh, yes.
It has a, what is it called?
Milestone for that,
which I am planning to extend with tasks, with plans.
First, you know, it's like with Pydantic,
you know, at some point it separated the core
when it was moving to Pydantic 2.
And that's one of the plans for Cadwin,
you know, separate the core
without breaking the public interfaces.
And then at some point use this core
to build more Cadwins, you know,
Cadwin Django, Cadwin Flask, whatever.
or it doesn't even have to be a part of Catwin.
The approach is there so anyone can use it
because 99% of complexity in implementing Catwin
was actually figuring out these patterns
and understanding how to do it.
Because unlike a web app,
unlike, I don't know, many apps that we develop daily,
it doesn't, these things haven't been done.
People have migrated stuff, but it was mostly, you know, oh, change this dictionary without a proper DSL or without code generation, you know, without the niceties that would make your IDs happy and that would make, you know, auto-completion happy.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
You are a contributor to TypeShed, which is awesome.
Oh, yes.
So you must care about conveying the type information of the different versions and stuff like that.
That's tricky, right?
And of course, working on FastAPI and Pydantic, those are very type.
Oh, and the shirt says Type Hints for Life.
I love it.
I don't have any cool slogan in my eyes.
I have gray stripes, but I should.
Very cool.
So yeah, want to speak to the type hint type information aspect of this whole thing?
Well, essentially, as I mentioned, Stripe did it using simply dictionaries, and it was mostly untyped.
As probably many people know, Stripe, after having so many problems with scalability in terms of the team scalability and problems with typing,
they have decided to adopt Sorbet.
Well, not adopt, create Sorbet,
which is essentially a type checker.
It's like a type checker and DSL for Ruby for type hints,
which is really nice.
It has both the runtime component
and a static component as far as I remember.
But they still most of the time work with untype code,
which essentially can lead to many errors.
Cadwin tries to make sure
that you still work with your schemas.
You still know which schema you work with.
It's always the latest.
And Cadwin tries to make sure
that you're not going to have any type errors
if you don't want to.
And you're going to have all of the niceties
of having this dynamic
request response conversion thing.
So we're trying to take the best of both worlds,
have you support very little code,
but make sure that you can type in everything
without any issue
and you're not going to have problems
and your type checker is going to check everything for you.
And your VS Code is going to see
which field something has,
which type something has.
Yeah, excellent.
One of the big problems
with like all the runtime modifications.
Like one way you could have done this
is that app startup,
it could look at all of those things
and it could just dynamically generate
all the different versions
and all the things, you know,
using metaprogramming.
But then the editor does that.
Yeah, it does that with the endpoints
because endpoints are not,
you know, your editors,
they don't care about endpoints.
Exactly.
You never call your endpoint from your code.
No, you usually code the business logic from it,
which is why I decided to do it in runtime.
You don't really need it.
But for schemas, yes.
For schemas, having them generated
and then having people guessing
and then having their IDs just put everything in red,
that is horrible.
I wouldn't want anyone to have that.
Yeah, yeah, I don't like it either.
Not at all.
It's right up there with the star, star, star, k, w, orgs.
have a good time guessing in my world.
I don't like either of them.
Awesome.
All right.
Well, let's just maybe touch real quickly
on a couple of other choices that are out here.
You know, Cadwin looks awesome,
but we also have, for example,
we have from Dean Way,
we have FastAPI versioning,
which has a very different philosophy.
It has kind of the V1, the V2 style
that you might maintain multiple versions of.
You want to just maybe speak to your thoughts
on this one real quick
and people can take that if they like this.
It's a great library.
And I think it's either the first or the most popular.
It's definitely the most popular,
but I think it might even be the first library
in FastAPI to implement versioning,
implement proper versioning.
It has a few issues.
First of all, it only, as far as I remember,
It is mostly, how do I say it?
It is mostly duplication based.
So it doesn't automate anything for you,
which is a good thing if you know what you're doing
and you're not going to have a lot of versions.
But if you have 10 or 20 versions,
if you want to keep them for a long time,
this is the endpoint copying approach that I mentioned
that with time is going to kill you,
which is a problem here.
The second problem is that it, as far as I understand, kind of recommends semantic versioning.
It doesn't bind you to it.
You can use dates, though you have to make sure that they're dates yourself.
And you can use just simple integers.
So you're not bound by semantic versioning, but it has a few examples with that.
Aside from these two, it's an amazing library.
And for anyone who just wants to version a small app,
just add a single version that is going to be,
the old version is going to be deleted in like two months.
Use that.
Use FastAPI versioning.
It's an amazing library and you don't need anything else.
Catwin is for use cases
where you need to keep a larger number of versions
or if the changes between your versions are much trickier.
Sure.
Yeah, like this might be pretty good
for my example I talked about with the courses app that we built right we literally have two
versions it's been around since 2018 and there's two versions you know like that would be a decorator
and I'm probably good to go I don't need to think too much about it precisely no code generation no
nothing you just you know yeah you just put it in and you go yep all right another one if you're a
flask person you could have flask rebar which seems to have a real similar philosophy to what
you just described but you know works for flask well i i feel like it's uh a little
more complex than that if i remember on us discussing that let me pull that up
Oh, yes, no, it is also the parent point.
So it also allows you to duplicate single endpoints.
And it also allows you to -- how do I describe it?
It also allows you to do arbitrary prefixes.
So you can have integers, you can have dates, you can have whatever.
Old, new, whatever.
Yeah, old new.
I guess some people do that.
Yeah, latest, latest.
- Yeah, yeah, latest, latest, final.
Yes, exactly.
- But yeah, it's really similar.
- They probably use zipping up folders
for version control as well
and just naming them by the date.
Final, final, final.
- Yeah, let's not use Git.
Let's just copy them.
And I mean, as per versioning, that's like a really good metaphor.
If you are a person that just needs another version of their Google Doc, you wouldn't use Git.
Well, unless you use Git for everything else.
And same here.
You don't need a huge combine for using Flask.
And Flask usually, at least in my experience, tries to build simpler APIs.
you wouldn't use, well, most companies that do API first don't use Flask. They try to do, you know,
Django DRF or FastAPI, which is why this library seems like a perfect choice for that.
Yeah. Yeah, indeed. It seems really nice. One of the things that we were speaking of duplication,
one of the things that they just jump right into to demonstrate here, and I imagine the FastAPI
version one as well could do it but there's one endpoint that doesn't change and there's one that
is different so they copy the one that's different but for the one that doesn't change they just put a
v1 and a v2 decorator on that one and it it remains unchanged basically right
yep but i mean uh cadwin tries to escape this kind of verbosity and essentially you have all
endpoints everywhere. And if you want to, you know, omit some endpoint or change some endpoint
or add some endpoint into the new version, you just add a version change and say, oh,
this endpoint didn't exist in the old version. That's it.
Yeah. Yeah, that's cool. Very cool. Yeah, because if you had 20 of these,
you'd have 20 decorators in a little function. Right. That's what I'm saying. But I mean,
Not a huge issue for Flask.
I haven't seen anyone building, I don't know,
50 or 200 endpoint apps with Flask.
I'm sure people do that, but I think it's the minority.
Sure.
All right.
Other side of the fence, Django REST framework, DRF.
You already mentioned them a little bit.
And so Django, they already have versioning built into the framework itself, right?
they have versioning interfaces built into.
So like it's not,
they're not implementing versioning for you,
but they give you all the tools
to implement your own versioning.
Got it.
Yeah, okay.
So they kind of have the building blocks for it.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, I think we are pretty much out of time,
but thank you for being here.
It's been really interesting.
Oh, it was for me as well.
Thank you for having me here.
yeah you've given everyone a lot to think about you know before we wrap it up uh two quick things
you know um notable pypi package i mean we've already given cadwin a shout out anything else
that like oh i came across this and it was super cool maybe it deserves a little bit of a shout
out anything that like use a lot that you would recommend um so for us in our company we started
using one more package of mine.
It's called pytest Fixture Classes.
Essentially, when you are building groups of fixtures
that create some objects for you to use in your tests,
and then all of a sudden,
one of your tests needs an object
that's a little different, just a little bit,
and then everything just falls apart.
Well, a factory fixture pattern
that you can see in pytest
allows you to make a function within a function, and one of them is a fixture, and that's all
cool and nice, but then it's not typed. Yeah, you can use the callable syntax, and then you're not
going to have the keyword arguments there, and otherwise you can write a protocol, and it's a lot
of code. What pytest fixture classes does is it allows you to type everything there. So you write
the same amount of code, but it's all typed. And now you have, you can have groups of fixture classes
building on top of each other, which is a nice pattern to have, but a really bad pattern to abuse.
Very cool. All right. Well, nice, nice recommendation. People can check that out.
the audience already says, amazing thing, I'm already using it.
So final call to action, people have APIs,
they've listened to us talk for an hour and they're like,
oh, we should be versioning our APIs.
We probably should be doing something here.
What do you recommend people do?
How do they get started?
How do they go further?
So first you need to decide whether your use case is simple.
How many versions are you going to support?
If you're not planning to support more than two versions, or if you are supporting versions only for your internal microservices or only for your front end, then consider using the simple tools.
Consider using the FastAPI versioning, you know, Flask Rebar, things like that.
But then once you realize that you need to support versions for months and you need three or more versions and, you know, you're providing your versions as a public, you know, to the public, then I advise moving straight into Cadwin or Cadwin-like frameworks.
If you use FastAPI, you can just use Cadwin.
It has a bit of a learning curve, but within making one version, you will realize just how simple it is.
And if you're not using Cadwyn, that's fine as well.
I have all of the resources that I used to build it
and all of the resources, you know,
describing different ways of API versioning there
in the repository in the theory section.
So you can just read that.
And even if you don't like that approach,
we describe everything else there.
So you'll be able to pick the one you like.
But my personal recommendation,
don't pick the directories.
They're painful.
Awesome. Really good advice. Super cool project. So thank you for being here, Stanislav, and talk to you later.
Talk to you later.